DOC-343: Unsat Cores Visualisation (#153)
Certora/Documentation: docs/prover/checking/coverage-info.md

# Coverage Info

The {ref}`--coverage_info` flag enables automatic computation of coverage
information for a verification run. In particular, using this flag can help you
answer questions such as:

* *Are all solidity functions from the input involved in proving my rules?*
* *Are all solidity commands from the input involved in proving my rules?*
* *Supposing an `assert` in my rule is not reachable, what is the reason for the
  unreachability?*
* *Do I really need all hooks that are defined in my `.spec` file(s)?*
* *Do I really need all `require` statements in my rule?*
* *Do I really need to initialize a CVL variable in my rule?*
* *Do I really need all of the preserved blocks in my CVL `invariant`?*

To answer the above questions, the Certora Prover identifies a minimal subset of
the commands in the input `.sol` and `.spec` files that are relevant for proving
the CVL properties. If some of the input `.sol` commands are not relevant for
deriving the proof, it might indicate that the specification does not cover all

> behavior implemented in the smart contract. If some of the input `.spec`

Reviewer: I'd generally refer to `.sol` files or Solidity commands but not `.sol` commands.  Similarly "`.spec` commands" should be "CVL commands"

commands are irrelevant (typically unnecessary `require` statements or variable
initializations), it indicates that the CVL rules/invariants can be made
stronger. 

You can access the coverage visualization via `Job Info -> Coverage Info page`
buttons:

![Coverage Info Button](coverage-info-button.png)

## Examples

### Tautology example
Consider the following CVL rule called `tautology`: 

```cvl

> rule tautology(uint256 fundId, method f) { 

Reviewer: This is a complex enough example that I'd consider turning on line numbers and referring to them in the text below (e.g. "we required `other != manager` on line 5").

To do so, I think the syntax is
````
```{code-block} cvl
:linenos:

rule tautology(...) {
 ...
}
```
````

	env e;
	address manager =  getCurrentManager(fundId);
	address other;
	require other != manager && other != e.msg.sender;
	calldataarg args;
	f(e,args);
	address newManager = getCurrentManager(fundId);
	assert newManager!= other || newManager != manager;
}
```

Notice that we required that `other != manager` and hence the `assert` is

> necessarily `true` (see the concept of a {term}`tautology`). The executions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
necessarily `true`, so the rule is a {term}`tautology`. The executions of
```

`getCurrentManager(...)` and `f(...)` are completely irrelevant. 

The coverage visualization is shown below. It consists of two *panes*: 
1. The left pane shows *per-line* visualization.
2. The right pane shows detailed info about individual visualized lines. 

> ![Example Coverage Info Visualization](tautology-sol-and-spec-cropped.png)

Reviewer: I would consider shrinking down the left column more so that the entire image can be a little larger; the text is hard to read.  This isn't necessary though because I don't think the text really requires the user to read the code.

or might not be needed for the proof. Green, red or yellow background means we
have some information about values of commands on the line:

1. Green means that all of the values on the line are relevant for proving the
   property. 
2. Red means that none of the values on the line is relevant for proving the
   property. In particular, you can arbitrary change the values and the property
   would still hold.
3. Yellow means that some of the values on the line are relevant and some are
   not. 

Furthermore, if we have multiple rules/invariants or a parametric rule (such as
our `tautology`), we can also have multiple rules/invariants mapping to a single
`.sol` or `.spec` line. In such a case, a yellow line means that some of the
values on the line are relevant for proving some of the rules/methods/invariants
and some of the values are not relevant. If you want to generate coverage
visualization for a single rule or method, use {ref}`--rule` or {ref}`--method`.

The right pane provides detailed information about individual values mapped to
the lines grouped by the rule/method/invariant name (denoted *rule*). For

> instance, in the Tautology example, we can see that the value of the command

Reviewer: either "tautology example" (lowercase) or "`tautology` example" (naming the rule).

> instance, in the Tautology example, we can see that the value of the command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instance, in the Tautology example, we can see that the value of the expression
```

`other != manager` on line `11` matters, whereas the value of `other !=
e.msg.sender` is irrelevant for the proof. Also, note that the pane shows e.g.
both `other != manager` and `other == manager`; this is due our internal
representation of the input where we encode `other != manager` as `!(other ==
manager)`. 

## Basic vs. advanced mode

The `--coverage_info` flag takes three possible values: `none`, `basic` and
`advanced`:
1. `none` means no coverage analysis, 

> 2. `basic` means relatively fast but possibly very imprecise analysis (i.e. can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `basic` means relatively fast but possibly very imprecise analysis (i.e. the tool may
```

   claim that some values are not relevant even if they are, and also vice
   versa), 
3. and `advanced` means possibly slow but more precise analysis. 

## Completeness
We perform the coverage analysis on our internal {term}`SMT` representation of the {term}`verification condition`, and then map the results of
the analysis to the `.sol` and `.spec` files. Unfortunately, due to the
compilation of the solidity code to EVM bytecode, we cannot maintain a complete
mapping between commands from solidity and commands in our SMT representation.

> Consequently, the visualization on `.sol` files can be very limited. 

Reviewer: Might be worth an extra sentence saying how it is limited.  Can it fail to highlight a relevant line, highlight an irrelevant line, both, something else?

# Coverage Info via Unsat Cores

> The `--coverage_info [none|basic|advanced]` flag enables automatic computation of `.sol` and `.spec` files coverage w.r.t. the underlying verification task. In particular, using this flag can help you answer questions such as:

Author: thanks! done

* *Are all solidity functions from the input involed in proving my rules?*
* *Are all solidity commands from the input involed in proving my rules?*
* *Supposing an `assert` in my rule is not reachable, what is the reason for the unreachability?*
* *Do I really need all hooks that are defined in my .spec file(s)?*
* *Do I really need all `require` statements in my rule?*
* *Do I really need to initialise a CVL variable in my rule?*
* *Do I really need all preserved blocks in my CVL `invariant`?*

> To answer the above questions, the Certora Prover generates a so-called *unsat core* which, intuitively, represents the minimal subset of the commands in the input `.sol` and `.spec` files that are needed to prove the CVL properties. If some of the input `.sol` commands are not needed to derive the proof, it might indicate that the specification does not cover all behavior implemented in the smart contract. If some of the input `.spec` commands are not needed to derive the proof (typically unnecessary `require` statements or variable initializations), it indicates that the CVL rules/invariants can be made stronger. 

Author: Ok, I have completely avoided the concept of unsat cores.

We visualize this *coverage* information in a dedicated HTML file: `zipOutput/Reports/UnsatCorevisualization.html`. Furthermore, we also visualize the unsat core coverage information on our `TAC` representation of the verification condition. 

> 

Author: I have completely removed the mentions about TAC and visualisation on TAC. Alex is now working on a dedicated TAC part of the documentation; I will add it there.

In the rest of this section, we provide a more detailed explanation of the concept of unsat cores and demonstrate it on an example. 

> 

Author: Since I removed a lot of content (including sections), showing the contents does not feel right anymore

 
## Unsat cores

> 

Author: completely removed

4. Each TAC program is then converted to an SMT formula such that the formula is unsatisfiable if and only if the property holds (i.e. cannot be violated). 

The SMT formula  is built from a set `A` of *assertions*, say `{A1, A2, ..., An}`, that are built over a set of *variables*. Intuitively, you can see the assertions as mathematical equations. The formula is *satisfiable* if there exists an assignment to the variables that satisfies all the assertions simultaneously. Otherwise, the formula is *unsatisfiable*. In practice, it is often the case that already a small subset of `A` is unsatisfiable. Especially, one can extract a *minimal unsatisfiable subset* `U` of `A`. The *minimality* here means that if you remove any assert from `U` then it becomes satisfiable, i.e., it is not a *minimum cardinality*. We call a minimal unsatisfiable subset of `A` an *unsat core* of `A`. 
For example, assume that `A = {a, !a, !b, a || b}` where `a` and `b` are Boolean variables. 
There are two minimal unsatisfiable subsets (i.e. unsat cores) of this formula:

> `{a, !a}` and `{!a, !b, a || b}`.

Author: I am not sure whether it is a good idea. There are many academic papers I can reference, however, I am afraid it might be confusing (the papers are dealing with particular problems/applications/algorithms that are different than our. 

I think (hope?) that the "definition" I provided is understandable. But I will update the example `A = {a, !a, !b, a || b}` to contain also an assert that is not in any unsat core! E.g. `a || !b`

> `{a, !a}` and `{!a, !b, a || b}`.

Reviewer 2: I was thinking more of a script of some lecture or so, or perhaps even a book, if there is one ... (science-y is maybe not the best word ... uhm, didactic, maybe -- university-teaching-y ...)
but yeah, not saying yours isn't rigorous or understandable :-) -- just thought maybe that these too goals at the same time might make things harder than they needed to be here ...

There are several different kinds of assertions in `A` and some of them correspond to commands from the TAC program. In particular, for every `assign`, `assume` and `assert` command `Ci` from the TAC program, there is a corresponding assert `Ai` in `A`. Suppose we obtain an unsat core `U` of `A`. Then, the meaning of every excluded assert `Ai in (A - U)` is the following:

- If `Ci` is an `assume` or `assert` command then `Ci` can be completely removed from the TAC program without causing a violation of the underlying CVL property.

> - If `Ci` is an `assign` command, for instance `R1 = R2 + R3`, then the right hand side of the equation can be `havoc'd` without violating the underlying CVL property, i.e. in our example we can replace `R1 = R2 + R3` by `R1 = havoc`.

Author: Yes, it is `R1 = havoc` :) You can check (I guess) any preSolver tac dump; the havocs are typically the first lines there.

Furthermore, we maintain a mapping between the commands in the TAC program, and the commands in the input `.sol` and `.spec` files. In particular, for `.spec` files, we usually have a mapping for a vast majority of the commands (CVL `assert`s, `require`s, and variable assignments). Unfortunately, for `.sol` files, the mapping is very limited due to the compilation to the bytecode (the compilers are not build by Certora and hence we cannot ensure preservation of mapping between commands in `.sol` and commands in the bytecode). 

## Unsat core examples

### Tautology example
Assume the following CVL rule called `tautology`. 

```cvl
rule tautology(uint256 fundId, method f) { 
	env e;
	address manager =  getCurrentManager(fundId);
	address other;
	require other != manager && other != e.msg.sender;
	calldataarg args;
	f(e,args);
	address newManager = getCurrentManager(fundId);
	assert newManager!= other || newManager != manager;
}
```

> We first call a solidity function `getCurrentManager(...)` to get the address of the *current* `manager` of the underlying smart contract. Subsequently, we create another address `other` and require that `other != manager && other != e.msg.sender`. Subsequently, we call a function `f(...)` of the contract, and, assuming this function call could have changed the manager, we get the value `newManager` of the *current* manager. Finally, we assert that either `newManager!= other` or `newManager != manager`. However, notice that we required that `other != manager` and hence the `assert` is necessarily `true`. The function calls of `getCurrentManager(...)` and `f(...)` are completely irrelevant. 

Author: ok, removed highlight

> ###  Visualization on the `.sol` and `.spec` files

Author: Yes, I read it somewhere (README I guess)

> We first call a solidity function `getCurrentManager(...)` to get the address of the current `manager` of the underlying smart contract. Subsequently, we create another address `other` and require that `other != manager && other != e.msg.sender`. Subsequently, we call a function `f(...)` of the contract, and, assuming this function call could have changed the manager, we get the value `newManager` of the current manager. Finally, we assert that either `newManager!= other` or `newManager != manager`. However, notice that we required that `other != manager` and hence the `assert` is necessarily `true`. The function calls of `getCurrentManager(...)` and `f(...)` are completely irrelevant. 

Author: ok

> 

Author: added a link to the glossary

You can access the unsat cores visualization via `Job Info -> Unsat Core Page` buttons, as shown on Figure 1. 

> ![](coverage-info-button.png)

Author: added

> Figure 1: The `.spec` & `.sol` visualization button.

Author: removed

The visualization itself is shown on Figure 2. It consists of two *panes*: 
1. The left pane shows *per-line* visualization.
2. The right pane shows detailed info about individual visualized lines. 

![](tautology-sol-and-spec-new.png)
Figure 2: The visualization of the Tautology example on `.sol` and `.spec`. 

In particular, in the left pane, we highlight lines from individual `.sol` and `.spec` files. 

> Every line can have either none, green, red or yellow background color. No background means we have no information about this line. For instance, it might not be neither `assert` nor `require` nor `assign` command, or we might not have the mapping due to compilation to the EVM bytecode. Green, red or yellow background means that we have a mapping to one or more commands on the line (one `.spec`/`.sol` line can be often broken down to several TAC commands) with the following meaning:

Author: rephrased

1. Green means that all of the TAC commands that are mapped to the line are in the unsat core, i.e. needed to prove the property. 
2. Red means that none of the TAC commands that are mapped to the line are in the unsat core, i.e. not needed to prove the property.
3. Yellow means that some of the TAC commands that are mapped to the line are in the unsat core and some of them are not in the unsat core.

> Furthermore, if we have multiple rules/invariants or a parametric rule (such as our `tautology`), we can also have multiple rules/invariants mapping to a single `.sol` or `.spec` line. That is, we generate just a single, joint, visualization for all the rules/invariants (run with `--rule` and `--method` flags to get a visualization for a single rule/method/invariant). In such a case, a yellow line means that some of the commands on the line are needed to prove some of the rules/methods/invariants and some of the commands are not needed. 

Reviewer: Note that the references for `--rule` and `--method` are defined in #157

> Furthermore, if we have multiple rules/invariants or a parametric rule (such as our `tautology`), we can also have multiple rules/invariants mapping to a single `.sol` or `.spec` line. That is, we generate just a single, joint, visualization for all the rules/invariants (run with `--rule` and `--method` flags to get a visualization for a single rule/method/invariant). In such a case, a yellow line means that some of the commands on the line are needed to prove some of the rules/methods/invariants and some of the commands are not needed. 

Author: updated

> The right pane provides detailed information about individual lines and commands mapped to the lines group by the rule/method/invariant name (denoted *rule*) and the *value*, where each *value* refers to a particular `assign`, `assert` or `assume` TAC command that is mapped to the line. For instance, in the Tautology example, we can see that sub-command `other != manager` of line `11` matters (is in the unsat core), whereas `other != e.msg.sender` is not in the unsat core. Also, note that the pane shows e.g. both `other != manager` and `other == manager`; this is because in our TAC representation we encode `other != manager` as `!(other == manager)`. 

Author: updated

> ### Visualization on TAC 

Author: Alex gave webinar just a few weeks ago about using our TAC dumps to better understand and resolve timeouts. No one is saying that the end users have to look at a TAC dump; but if they can, it can help them a lot. Moreover, there is even a button (for long time already) to the TAC dump from the HTML report. 
1. Perhaps we should open a broader discussion (including other folks from the company) about allowing/disallowing end users to work with TAC
2. If we do not want to include TAC in the official documentation "for basic users", is there a place with documentation for "advanced users"?

> ### Visualization on TAC 

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I figure we haven't synced on this enough...
My understanding, e.g. with Nurit and Shelly, lately was that we want to cautiously expose Security Engineers, and advanced end users to the graphical TAC dumps (not 100% sure about those groups, perhaps we can define it better).
Shelly has been making them nicer for that reason, and I have for example based some of the timeout feedback on them.

I think we're all in agreement that it would be nicer to lift everything user-facing to spec / source level, but this is, among other things, a developer-time tradeoff (not necessarily an aspect we advertise, but still..).
Another aspect is that TAC is closer to the VC, so for instance when it comes to understanding an SMT timeout, it might be helpful to see "what the solver is seeing" (e.g. when someone thinks they've summarized all nonlinear away, but haven't, they can see it in TAC).

The plan, afaiu, was to communicate a very rough working understanding about the TAC dumps. 
As of now, this mostly includes looking at
 - the control flow graph, including the external calls that can be seen clearly in our graphs,
 - the "back pointers" that, on hover over some tac statements appear and show source/spec locations.

We should probably have discussed / communicated this with you Mike in particular earlier -- I guess it didn't make the way across the ocean :-/ ...
(also not against a wider discussion, but I understand it's especially Mike's purview ..)
 --> happy to discuss in any combination

> ### Visualization on TAC 

Reviewer 2: Note also that I have an upcoming PR that adds a stub for that TAC dump documentation -- which will be followed up by a PR for that documentation itself ... (actually, I'll make a jira issue right now ..)

> ### Visualization on TAC 

Author: removed

> On contrary to `.sol` and `.spec` visualization, we generate separate TAC unsat core visualization for individual rules/methods/invariants. To access it, click first on the particular rule/method/invariant in the `Rules` pane and then on the `Dump page` button as shown in Figure 3. 

Reviewer 2: note: in my `alex/timeouts-update` branch I'm adding a file `docs/prover/diagnosis/index.md`, which has a stub for the explanation of TAC reports
 --> you could cherry pick and link here (link by `[link text](tac-reports)` )

> On contrary to `.sol` and `.spec` visualization, we generate separate TAC unsat core visualization for individual rules/methods/invariants. To access it, click first on the particular rule/method/invariant in the `Rules` pane and then on the `Dump page` button as shown in Figure 3. 

Author: So you expect your branch will not get merged sooner than mine? :) I will probably wait and update it later. Moreover, I guess there are many places in our documentation that could enjoy a link to the TAC reports explanation, so perhaps we can do a PR just for that when you merge it?

> On contrary to `.sol` and `.spec` visualization, we generate separate TAC unsat core visualization for individual rules/methods/invariants. To access it, click first on the particular rule/method/invariant in the `Rules` pane and then on the `Dump page` button as shown in Figure 3. 

Reviewer 2: as you like, but yours is closer to completion -- mine is ready for review "soon", I hope

![](tac-visualization-button.png)
Figure 3: The TAC visualization button.

> The visualization here consists only of 2 colors: `green` means that the command is needed and `red` means that the command is not needed (i.e. not in the unsat core). In particular, Figures 4a and 4b show the TAC visualization for the Tautology example. 

Reviewer 2: perhaps "needed" ~> "needed for the proof" in the first instance

![](tautology-tac-a-new.png)
Figure 4a: The visualization of the Tautology example on TAC, part A. 

![](tautology-tac-b-new.png)
Figure 4b: The visualization of the Tautology example on TAC, part B.

> Namely, only the following TAC commands are in the unsat core:

Reviewer 2: perhaps drop the "Namely"

Author: Seems like I have not written any academic paper for a while (strict page limits do the trick...) :)

```
→ require other != manager && other != e.msg.sender
I95 = other287 SPEC
I96 = manager269 SPEC
tmp292293 = I95==I96 SPEC
B97 = !tmp292293 SPEC
...
certoraAssume288289 = B97&&B102 SPEC
assume certoraAssume288289
...
→ assert newManager != other || newManager != manager
I158 = newManager419 SPEC
I159 = other287 SPEC
tmp441442 = I158==I159 SPEC
B160 = !tmp441442 SPEC
I161 = newManager419 SPEC
I162 = manager269 SPEC
tmp449450 = I161==I162 SPEC
B163 = !tmp449450 SPEC
certoraAssert437438 = B160||B163 SPEC
assert certoraAssert437438,
```

Also, notice that some commands in the TAC dump are followed by "SPEC" or "SOL" with a violet background color; these are commands for which we have a mapping to `.spec` and `.sol` files, respectively. 

## Basic vs. advanced mode

The `--coverage_info` flag takes three possible values: `none`, `basic` and `advanced`:
1. `none` means no unsat core analysis and no visualization, 

> 2. `basic` means relatively fast bust possibly very imprecise analysis, 

Reviewer 2: perhaps "analysis" ~> "unsat core information" (?)

Author: I somehow like `analysis` more than `information`. There is an implication, right? "imprecise analysis => imprecise unsat core information". The other direction of the implication does not hold (something between `data` and `information` might go wrong). 

But I will drop ` and no visualization` from `1.` so that it is more consistent.

3. and `advanced` means possibly slow but more precise analysis. 

> In particular, the Certora Prover internally does many various transformations of the TAC program before it converts the TAC program to SMT. These transformations usually simplify the TAC program and make the whole verification task easier and faster. However, some of these transformations might lead to loosing a mapping between the initial and the final TAC program, and consequently also loosing a mapping between the SMT encoding and the input `.sol` and `.spec` files. In such case, some lines/commands in the `.spec` and `.sol` visualization might be marked as not needed even if they are actually needed; the other direction, i.e. spurious red lines, is also possible. The `basic` mode keeps all the TAC transformations and hence is faster but possibly more imprecise, whereas the `advanced` mode turns off some of the transformations to make the analysis more precise. 

Reviewer 2: This makes sense to me ... it also makes me wonder more generally (also wrt my upcoming DOC PRs):
Is there really no place in the docs for such elaborations :-)? 

 -- maybe we could have a box (like the "note" and "todo" boxes) that indicates background information that isn't directly related to using the tool, but gives a deeper understanding of what's happening behind the scenes (?)

(sorry for hijacking this PR review a bit -- we can always break out into a zoom or something if this becomes longer)

> In particular, the Certora Prover internally does many various transformations of the TAC program before it converts the TAC program to SMT. These transformations usually simplify the TAC program and make the whole verification task easier and faster. However, some of these transformations might lead to loosing a mapping between the initial and the final TAC program, and consequently also loosing a mapping between the SMT encoding and the input `.sol` and `.spec` files. In such case, some lines/commands in the `.spec` and `.sol` visualization might be marked as not needed even if they are actually needed; the other direction, i.e. spurious red lines, is also possible. The `basic` mode keeps all the TAC transformations and hence is faster but possibly more imprecise, whereas the `advanced` mode turns off some of the transformations to make the analysis more precise. 

Author: I removed the information from here and added a small section `## Completeness`

## Multiple unsat cores

> In general, the SMT formula can have multiple unsat cores; in fact, even exponentially many w.r.t. the number of assertions in the formula. By default, we generate just a single unsat core per rule/method/invariant. Use can use the flag `--prover_args "-numOfUnsatCores <k>"` to instruct the Certora Prover to generate up `k` unsat cores for each rule/method/invariant. At this moment, we support `k > 1` only for the TAC visualizations. In particular, 

Reviewer 2: are you talking about "minimal unsat cores" here? -- is this implicit by your definition?..
(otherwise it's even less suprising that there are many, naturally..)

Author: My definition says "We call a minimal unsatisfiable subset of `A` an *unsat core* of `A`.". There is no *minimal* unsat core. Just *unsat core*.

Author: I removed this section

> In general, the SMT formula can have multiple unsat cores; in fact, even exponentially many w.r.t. the number of assertions in the formula. By default, we generate just a single unsat core per rule/method/invariant. Use can use the flag `--prover_args "-numOfUnsatCores <k>"` to instruct the Certora Prover to generate up `k` unsat cores for each rule/method/invariant. At this moment, we support `k > 1` only for the TAC visualizations. In particular, 

Reviewer 2: maybe we really need to define user groups or so ... but if we want to build a community of experts, there might be a place for something like this also rtd (not only confluence), I'm thinking -- something to discuss ...
